And so we did it.
The show opened on September 10th.
September 11th, as you recall, wasn't a very nice day.
A very happy day for everyone.
And in fact, the attendance of the museum was down for the next few months as it was every place in the country.
But the attendance in this gallery may have been down, but I can tell you it was busy all the time.
And the community came out in force, and I don't actually know, I can't say who all the people were in there.
But my understanding is that it was the community that came out in force for this show.
And it was a wonderful opportunity for anybody.
I mean, it was a great, it's a marvelous manuscript, and here you can actually, this reproduces, this shows you the content of the show.
And a wonderful author by Tom Matthews.
Well, Worcester, where we are from, has one of the largest Armenian communities in the United States.
Ah, okay, right.
And Boston.
Particularly Worcester.
Oh, really?
Yeah, the first, in fact, before Sororian died, he gave a pilgrimage to Worcester.
He had never been to Worcester before.
The first two Armenian churches in America were in Worcester, so it was very, very true.
Well, in other words, there were two separate communities, the California Cerulean community, which came out here, and the Worcester community.
So, we even listened to her hearing about this great exhibition here.
Oh, really?
Oh, wow.
Oh, how interesting.
And so, it's very exciting.
We just missed it.
I guess it closed recently.
Yeah, you just missed it.
It closed three days.
Four weeks ago.
We were trying to get up here.
We were only here for 45 minutes or so.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Anyway, that would give you some idea.
It was a wonderful book.
And so that was a great opportunity.
You know, for me, as I said, we served an audience.
To me, it's thrilling to show a discount book.
I've never heard a quote like that before.
But, you know, then the public sees something and comes to understand something about books that they never see just going through a regular exhibition.
Well, the Book of Kells.
Each day, one page.
If you want to see the whole book of Kells, you have to go for like a year and a half every day.
Yeah, exactly.
In our exhibitions, we can't do that.
It's not realistic.
So you don't have that many opportunities.
Anyway, let me go get some books.
You want us to stay?
Okay.
Marshall?
So these are my favorite books in the show.
I've been planning this show maybe since the late 80s.
It was originally called The Vase and the Volcanoes.
And then when I went to the British Museum, I was going to borrow some of Cerulean Hamilton's vases.
oh, we're planning a show called Veins and Volcanoes.
And so I sort of shelved it.
And then when there were these interns working on their show, they said, why don't you do something?
You have great things.
And I said, oh, I can just wheel this old show out and do it in this space.
But in the meantime, along with Sir William Hamilton's base book, the 10 before gray, and other things, we had bought this amazing map of Naples done in 1776.
And it's a commission.
by the Duke of Dinoya, and also sponsored by the two kings, Charles III and III.
And it was great because it was uncut, and we were a little worried that the margins were going to cause the map maybe not to.
It was also open.
It didn't seem to be a problem.
We just put them all in separate frames.
And it's really impressive.
It's got the panorama at the bottom,
And then it's got this wonderful overhead view of the city.
So this was bound in a book?
Was this in a book?
Usually they were mounted.
There's a very well-known knolling map of Rome, 1748, and they would cut it, mount it on fabric, and then show it.
But this was never cut.
But how would they present it?
For instance, this is clearly the continuation of this.
cut the margins and then paste them on a backing.
And these were shown in these large halls and meeting rooms in chateaux and mantons and things like that.
The most interesting thing about this for me is, who are these books made for?
These books over here are actually made to be read.
You can hold them in your lap.
And some of these are things like the Kennedy's DeRay, the Bayes book,
These huge albums.
They're country house books.
They're so huge.
They're made to be played.
Guide books and souvenirs.
Have you produced a catalog of this?
We have a short catalog list.
Actually, I can hand you the publicity kits.
That was great.
We didn't do a brochure or a catalog.
We did a kind of joint brochure.
And all I do is hand out these press kits because everybody wants objects.
That's hard to do anything, but I won't go there.
I've usually done that sort of thing.
And I was trying to contrast the beginnings of the tourist guidebook here, and the map, and the kind of small guidebook that would take a real track.
Look at this, you see?
When we talk about paratextual elements in books, the type of thing you could never do to replicate a book on a computer.
You could never replicate that.
You have to have that object.
You have to have that object, don't you?
What do you call that?
This is a huge show.
It's a huge show.
They did a lot of these.
This is an 18th century home theatrical format.
they had viewing boxes as well but is it a book would you call it a book or no it's just it's a work on paper it's you know it's it's something else it's like a print it's many prints actually and then they're mounted in the security format they had boxes if you go see devices of wonder you'll see a lot of them so there are several in there the other nice opportunity to come up with digital imaging was you can absolutely
dead-on accurate facsimiles of many of the pages and children so that you mitigate the problem of the opening in the book, which is always a problem.
The man at the Getty Museum who did these photographs was running back and forth between his last and the
actual rare book, and matching colors.
These were the kinds of collections that Hamilton would make for people because he was also interested in geology.
People would ask him to put together very nicely selected
sets of fragments of some of the antiquities or the tufa and the lava and then occasionally he would put little jewel boxes and little other kinds of curiosities in these, put them in a box for people so they could bring them home.
Could you give us 30 seconds on who Hamilton was?
Hamilton was the British ambassador to Naples from 1764 until Naples was really
shutting down under the onslaught of Napoleon in 1800.
So he went there.
He was from a noble, from the Dukes of Hamilton family, but he was a younger son.
So he got nothing.
That's the British system.
So he had a military career, and then he went into the service.
He was raised, his mother was in the service of King George III, and so he was raised as a kind of close colleague of a king, so he was very well positioned and he was sent and enabled.
He was a collector before that, he was a painting collector as well, and he had a very distinguished collection of paintings, prints,
book fragments.
He was one of these eclectic, hilarious, very interesting, very debonair man, and he was very charming.
His first wife played the harpsichord, and she played with Mozart.
We're going to have a performance in March.
It's an evening at Sir Reading Hamilton's, and just before you came out, I was talking with the theater professor, and he's going to do contemporary music, harpsichord concerts, vocal presentations,
Yeah, pretty interesting.
So Hamilton was a very interesting, erudite person who took people in the pictures of this town.
And so we took people on tours all around Mason, showing them the site.
He would take them on a hike up to the volcano.
He himself went as close as possible when the volcano was erupted.
And then they would go around to other places, make collections, go see sites, the excavations.
This is fabulous.
How does the Getty get handled?
Did they acquire all of these things?
No, no.
For years, since 1983, I've been buying them.
I like the introduction a lot.
I think first of all, this is a very interesting time.
And I like the fact that there are pictures of Hamilton holding the vase, showing him with his collection, with his vase, with the view of Naples behind him.
He was a real book collector.
How did I lift them?
I have a copy of it.
I'll give you my article.
It's on Hamilton.
Perfect.
I knew that.
He went around with a group of people.
They were from European port struggles and they all came to use in Hamilton and he would entertain them.
He was a kind of very
But it appears that he collected everything.
He did, he did.
And he knew about it.
He had a very hierarchical sensibility.
Yeah, he collected basers, he took people on these kind of stage tours.
Where is his second wife, Emma, who was the Lady Hamilton's attitude person?
And they did these stage discoveries of antiquity.
So there was range, you know, Lord so-and-so or Count so-and-so.
And the workers would be working, digging away.
Oh, they would find a tomb and a vase and things like that.
And so it was very interesting.
And this is a picture of one of those discoveries.
Now, I guess I'll look at that.
Think of color etching and rising, and this is a kind of experimental politician.
It's the first Colin Price book on our history.
The first coffee table.
Yes, yes.
And we said that they didn't have coffee table.
and these interested me a lot because i realized that before this there were no not whole color plates in art books they were in natural history books they were in maps uh other kinds of science anatomy books we're talking about the naples 1767 this is on your checklist yes 17
66 to 76.
The project went bankrupt in Naples because it was so expensive and so difficult to produce.
And Danko, the author, kind of escaped from Hamilton's grass and then turned up in Florence.
Hamilton's friend who was British Council in Florence said, you know what, we saw Dunkerville arriving the other day and he had a vast group of wagons that were carrying the papers, the plates that were printed, and the proper plates.
Amazing.
It's a very experimental period though.
And as the books went on, volume 1 and volume 2 have colored plates,
and then colored title pages, headpieces and headpieces, initials, this article, they start printing colored initials and headpieces.
So they are experimenting with the publication.
And I wanted to show how they did these, what they did with these initials with the reduced version,
of the same artist's larger plates of view, they would reduce them so that people could recognize the scenes in them.
They also borrowed from Piranesi in some of these initials.
And what do you call these kinds of books here?
View books, would you say.
And you acquired them?
Yes.
Well, they're very important also for our collections on the history of art, archaeology, and architecture.
Because this is the time when art history was taking off.
Winkelmann was working in Rome.
They were aware of Terminati's publication.
And so they were very self-consciously producing these books that were illustrating versions.
The text is the history of art from Antiquiri.
You should tell us how long you've been here, like from the beginning, right?
That's really true, yeah.
So you've actually been here from the very beginning of the development and all, and you really have to tell us about that.
We'll talk about that.
When we get in my office, we can talk about that.
It's really been fun, and I'm about to do a lecture in March on the history of the rare book collection here.
Well, then you can try it out on us if you want.
The other thing they did, they borrowed from other books of prints, and I just did facsimiles of some of these books, as well as these little plastic casts of gems that collectors valued very much at the time, and they put replicas of very famous collectors' gems that people would recognize.
in reduced format in the initials so in some ways the books were decorated like medieval binding like treasure binding okay indulge me for a second now you acquired this book this book is picturing these objects yeah just recently yeah i want to have a good example explain to me this is something i'm interested in that's not a book
it's a tourist object so it was a kind of collection that's kind of what you consider an accessory to the book in a way i wanted one example of these when you close this it looks exactly like a book there are eight volumes and they sit on the shelf and if you pulled it out if you pulled it from the spine you would think you are going to open a book when you open it
period M to 27, just so I could know the title.
Yes, they're by Brachi.
They were in a book format, and inside they made plaster cast replicas with a text on what would be the end paper of exactly what they were.
They were cast of gems from famous collections.
and people who didn't own the gems would collect these in the same way that they would collect the fragments of the stone.
And I wanted to have just one example, it was very inexpensive, I wanted it at an auction, to show the kinds of tourist objects that went along with the books and the prints in the maps that an 18th century person on the Grand Tour would collect.
But I think, not meaning to jump around, this does represent a new attitude.
We do collect other things, as you'll see from Devices of Wonder.
This is an eclectic collection, and it's nice that we don't have a firm collection development policy, but that we can show other aspects of art history, history of collecting, because we don't just collect books here.
We have photos, manuscripts, optical devices.
this is the kind of collecting i'm recommending that a person can do this kind of thing yeah yeah yeah and you don't have to we um i'm the head of the collection development department and we don't we have a policy but we it's not
so firm that we could never get something like that, and I would like to be that way.
That's the beauty of the Getty.
The Getty wants beautiful things.
Well, I think I'm just right.
This collection at the Research Institute is not about the museum's collection.
It's a study collection for our research.
When this performance takes place that the UCLA Taylor professor is planning, at certain points they will have a performance of Lady Hamilton's attitudes, which were based on antique objects, she would do these very slow,
changes of position and then she would be Niobe or she would be the Giraya and things like that and she would take the clothes and classical statues and then she would go into a box and change her garments a little bit.
This is Emma Hart.
This is her second wife.
She had a background in student in London, and she was sent actually by Hamilton's nephew, who didn't want her as a girlfriend anymore, and she was sent off to Naples.
to get rid of her, to read her sad stories.
And gradually, she was very, very beautiful.
She was painted by Romero and Reynolds, and Hamilton fell in love with her.
Isn't that great that she made out all of her work?
Yeah, yeah.
What a fear.
They were meant to be together.
She learned Italian.
She became a good friend of Queen Maria Carolina, who was one of Maria Theresa's daughters who was married off to different kings around Europe.
And then, she was very, very beautiful.
And so she gave these performances.
She was almost another part of Hamilton's collection.
This is a fabulous note here that maybe she entertained visitors with performances of striking poses based on antique subjects that became known to her as they asked.
So it's the objects.
Exactly what she just said.
These were recording prints.
They were published in North Italy.
and they were very popular there are quite a few sets of these prints by different artists and so these documents her her performance is based on her antiques as well as these beautiful paintings that were done of her by a well-known artist i wanted to show one of the bones of the antiquities of ercolano partially because
The Getty Museum Villa, which is going to open again in 2004, is based on where all the buildings that are going on at the beginning of the day is appearing.
And so that was an important exception.
And it shows one of the murals that Emma Hart and she really needed to start.
She based her performances on it when she was talking about it.
It's this very rich period when everything is feeding into everything else and so far, which is growing up.
And then finally, I wanted to show
Well, they took pictures, these three-dimensional paintings on the Antiphazes, and converted them into a page that was a two-dimensional colored print, documented a vase into a wooden vase book.
Is that right?
I've never seen anything like this before.
hand-colored, but also done with some stencils.
If you look at the book from the side, you can see the stencil technique.
The reason why I started to work on these is I'd invited Merle Adelson, who was also here, and I said, well, have they been collated?
And everybody said, what?
Well, yes, we do.
So I sat down with them, and they were the most extraordinary books.
And I decided, you know, I don't think anyone's been in a show channel.
They hadn't.
See, he's holding one of these books in his lap.
There were a couple auction sales when Emma went back to London, he died in 1903 back in London, and then she needed money and saw there were these famous sales.
And I went back and I wanted to know what his book collection was like.
He was going to tell us about the tour.
So it's kind of nice that I have an acrylic book flavor.
Did you sign in here?
They signed in over there.
So you said about 800,000 margins?
Yes.
And you said you were just buying like this.
From 1983 on, we were buying large collections and single items.
Initially, we bought large collections just to have a collection in order to fill in.
When I came here,
It was very difficult to know what to buy, because you could look at a dealer's catalog and buy anything.
And we couldn't do that, you know, responsibly, just in terms of buying.
So, if you want to get a little insight, it's perfect.
Yeah, exactly.
There are many, many book dealers in town.
We used book dealers.
The way that we were able to build a collection was to use very good book dealers, rely on their expertise, let them know what we were looking for, and they were guaranteed.
because we were paying, not outrageous prices, but we were on the high end of the market, because we were bringing in these large collections, things like Theodore Besterman's Duplicates.
He gave his collection of old art books.
It was published in this large catalogue to, it's actually right up there, it's dark blue and on the top shelf,
And that seemed like an excellent collection.
It was art historical, architectural, gardens, treatises, a great collection of a basic rare book library on art history.
And that came through a dealer, and he had collated the books for us and guaranteed their quality.
And so it's funny because at the time it seemed as though there were prices.
They seem like the biggest bargains in the world.
I was just thinking about that last night.
Yeah, yeah.
It's the big blue book on the top shelf.
See the thing that says old art books?
Just keep going to the right.
To the right, to the right, to the right.
There.
Right there.
We can take it out if you want to.
Just pull it out.
Oh, we can look at it later.
One thing you'll notice is, notice that all the shelves in this library have these bars across the earthquake.
And we've been having a lot lately.
Earthquake bars.
Because in the 94 earthquake, we realized that if people had been there, they would have, you know this famous picture of the book Fool?
And, you know, the shelves are falling down on him, and he's dying.
I don't know if that picture of it sounds pretty good.
It's in the famous books of fools, and there's the book fool, and the shelf is about to destroy him.
And since that was our experience during this last very severe earthquake, they did things like stabilize the shelves and then put fronts on them.
And then down in our vaults, all the shelves are locked together.
They're rolling, and they're locked.
so that the books won't fall off.
They're just big blocks of shelving on these rolling tracks.
I thought they were places to hang them.
No.
Safety concerns.
So basically you're developing two parallel collections of reference research type library and a rare book.
And there are different policies for each one of those.
The general library
is now going towards being a library that documents world art.
We started with traditional art history, so it was about Western European antiquity to contemporary.
And then we brought in South America.
We bought Australian collections.
We didn't go too much into Africa and Asia because of the vernacular languages.
We're now just about to discuss where we're going in terms of Asia.
because so much more work has been done in art history in Asia.
It's huge.
Yeah.
We worked like crazy.
You can't imagine.
I came from a state university library, the University of Missouri, which was an old art historical collection.
They bought their books in the 19th century.
Nice library.
The College Art Association was founded in Missouri, so it was a very traditional, humanistic collection.
My professor there, because I was the art librarian there and my degrees are from there,
He was named Helmut Lehmannhaupt for years.
He wrote the Krauss catalog.
I met him, and I knew exactly what I wanted to do.
I loved what he did.
The art, you know, the art history and the book.
Yeah, well, would you describe him as a mentor in this?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, a mentor and a kind of model.
And he was very German, and so he came and he lectured, and he didn't chair and have office hours with students and things like that.
He was very formal.
But he was also a very interesting art historian who worked with early printing and some of the transitional books like the block books and the, what do you call it, the penning drawings in books and that kind of illustration.
He did this famous book called Gutenberg and the Master of the Playing Cards.
And he was amazing.
wanted to do what he did.
That was based on a shitey vibe on it.
Yes, yes, exactly.
The little bears and the, you know, things like that in the margins that they realized had actually been made from copper plates, from playing cards.
Yeah, that's a very important monograph.
Yeah, yeah.
And then, here for me to be his research assistant, and I was so happy working for him for three years, and in that time we surveyed the Missouri stacks and we pulled the rare books out and put them in special collections, and it was an excellent experience for him.
Were you planning to be a librarian at this point?
I was just going to be an art librarian and work on rare books for my research.
And then, I guess I was at Missouri for about ten years as the art librarian, and I taught courses in the literature of the humanities.
So I talked about why music books looked different from Bibles, and when collected works started in the eighteenth century and nineteenth century.
It was fun, because I could pull out rare books and show people.
What do you mean by when collected books started?
When collected books, when it was thought important to collect an author's work and do a kind of octavo edition of them.
You don't think it was prior to that?
Not too much.
Pretty much the 18th century thing.
Why theater books look different.
How they evolved from playbooks to illustrated editions.
It was really fun.
I had a great time doing that.
I had a wonderful old humanities collection.
And I was able to come to UCLA and teach that for a while.
And then, probably interesting enough for this book that you're writing, I realized when electronic and digitized things began to happen, that the course would have to change a lot.
And I would have to do a lot more research.
And we were beginning to move the collections and be open at that time.
And I just went, you know what?
I can't do this anymore because the book world is beginning to change.
And the other thing was I didn't know how it was happening, and I felt kind of like the water was getting too deep.
I got scared.
I just thought, oh, I can't teach this course for a while.
We don't have any perspective right now.
What was the name of the course again?
It was just called Literature of Humanities.
But it went from the Renaissance to the 20th century.
So what were you afraid about in terms of the computer, though?
I didn't know what I was doing.
You know, I needed to know all the different ways in which all the different humanities
were adopting electronic formats or using those kinds of things and I would have had to go into philosophy and religion and I just kind of ran away.
Is that impacting your thoughts on how you're collecting for the Getty now?
Yes, very much so.
What are the more permanent formats and what are the transitional ones and how is it important to try to collect some of those transitional formats, particularly in terms of special collections and
in art history because the contemporary art world goes across media now.
You know, they use videos and they use sound.
They do performance art, artist books.
So you're thinking maybe you don't need the printed books?
Oh, no.
I would jump off the balcony before I would say that.
I think printed books, interestingly enough,
are the format that has lasted the longest and is the most stable.
Is that not interesting?
That fascinates me.
You're preaching to the choir.
Yeah, I know.
But that's like this kind of article of the first principle of my life.
I like people who are eponymous, and so I like the fact that my name is Marsha Reed, and I love to read.
And so I love to meet people who are like that, you know, who have names that say something about what their interests are.
There's a dealer that I was just working with in New York last week, this man named Armin Kuntz, who works for C.J.
Berner and Artemis Buxian.
It's close enough to Kuntz so that, you know, he works in art.
I like that.
It doesn't always work.
But you were saying how it is affecting your acquisition.
Yeah.
We have to stay with that.
If we're documenting the literature, continue broadly, as how researchers work, we must take that into account.
Otherwise, we would be in the lead-up category.
Well, that question you have to take into account when you don't pursue one at the expense of the other.
No.
We would never be able to... If a monograph is published, you're going to acquire that monograph.
Yeah.
You're not going to wait and see it.
But then all these, I mean, artists now are working very seriously on electronic formats, and we're discussing how are we going to collect that.
Who is going to collect it?
The other thing that's very clear, I think, is that you can't collect everything anymore.
No library, no repository can do it all, and so you have to
Have, at least in the corner of your eye, what other people are doing, and then that should inform your collecting in some way.
Now, Marcia, you said you came in 1983, and I'm to remind you that we hope you have a copy of an essay that you wrote on.
Yeah, the collector's books.
Yeah, I'll write myself a note.
But when you think about it, your tenure here,
almost precisely coincides with this whole Internet explosion, doesn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
The 80s is when this thing, when the impact of it, when the consequences of it, when people start really saying the book is dead.
Yeah.
This is it.
This is when it starts.
About the time that she's coming here and is mandated to build and really given the... A library.
Yeah, to build a library and to be given the... I mean, you must be the envy of everything.
Well, except for the amount of work I have to do, they might want to, because everybody always says, even in New York, they call their club, oh, you guys have all the money, I guess you can buy anything.
Terrible.
That and the other statement that almost made me fall off my chair at dinner was, do you ever pay attention to the market value?
Do you ever look at the, you know, just price of things you buy?
Oh, yeah.
That's all the work we do.
We spend our life in the CD-ROM of American Book Price is Current, and then we do press research all the time.
How anyone could think that we just cut a check?
That's scary.
Did you work on the Devices of Wonder exhibition now?
Only because my colleague, we've been here the longest.
Frances Turfak and I have both been here since 1983.
And so as I was buying books, we were working very closely on things that she might be interested in.
She says she's worked on that show for seven years.
In fact, I think she's been thinking about it longer.
The real genesis is that Werner Nikis collection of optical devices in pre-cinematics.
books, but we're very close friends, and so in a way, peripherally, the department has seven curators, and it's very collaborative.
So whenever it's a large collection that we're working on, it's usually a group of two or so, and then we discuss everything.
But I do like the fact that you do pull from all the different departments, and you really do.
It's a unique kind of an exhibition.
Yeah, it's amazing.
Everything does seem to generate from a collection that's here.
Or group, you know, maybe... A group of things, I guess, but making sense, making a narrative out of the objects, perhaps, is that not fair?
When I did this other show, which is called The Edible Monument, it was based on a special impression.
The Edible Monument.
Based on the festival collections, it had to do with banquets and presentation of food.
And so sometimes it takes a thematic and then uses that thematic to tell people about things.
I'm trying to find the recipe part.
And it was really fun to do that, but I also, I'm always thinking that I want to tell people about a certain kind of rare book or collection.
Yeah, you know what, and here's your folder.
Here we go.
These are the object lists for all of the grand toy shows.
Oh, the press release.
How about your current food marches?
Yes.
Because Edible Monument, I didn't realize that there's a huge world of foodies and gourmet cooks.
Can we staple it right here so we don't have it?
Sure, sure.
You don't mind that we are.
We won't get lost.
We've seen a coordinator yet.
A lot of papers and whatever.
Oh, it was wild.
You can't imagine what was going on.
At one point, Martha Stewart wanted to come, and we got all kinds of publicity in the restaurant, and Bon Appetit, and Gourmet, and things like that.
When was it?
And what my big acts that I'm always trying to grind in a kind of, you know, not terribly, I don't know, heavy-handed way, was that this is why we collect our books.
This is what you can find out.
This is how you can know about what people did.
I'm just making sure that when I hear really good things like that, I'm just making sure I'm getting it, which we are.
Yep, go ahead.
So it was so good, because of course the chefs didn't know about this.
Of course the bread makers.
We had people coming here to do demonstrations of how you actually made those things and with pictures.
But then all the chefs arrived with their scrapbooks, and people were sending me videos of their food pieces.
And it was wild.
I didn't know that there was this enormous world of food.
So not only the rare book people and the print people were interested in that, because that's what
I thought the show was about.
And festivals, ephemeral art made for festivals as shown in these books, because the courts would send them out.
And then the other courts would copy and say, oh, look what happened to Versailles.
We in Austria have to do this.
So then they'd do a similar thing in Vienna.
And they'd copy the Medici and stuff like that.
So it was very interesting.
But they have all these different dimensions.
So whenever you put out your books on a certain subject,
You get the print people and the book people and the science.
The Fringe has huge amounts of people in science who are interested in the optical devices and the kinds of images that they take.
But then we had a whole other section of the magicians.
And then children like that show.
Devices of Wonder was amazingly popular with children.
So people came and then they made a second visit and they brought their children with you.
Yeah, it's very nice to do things like that that aren't just for a certain public who could only appreciate old master drawings or paintings or things like that.
People really like books.
We really have to distinguish.
I mean, Getty has what, seven different, or how many different characters?
I guess what Tom does is really different from what you do.
We've had books in a very generic sense, but maybe you could just tell us a little bit.
What Tom does is study illuminated manuscripts, and that's a branch of art history.
And what we do is talk about art history in terms of its documents, but not so much the high art that everybody associates with art history, like the Mona Lisa or like the well-known paintings, say,
paintings of Rembrandt or something like that.
Ours are not so valuable documents that art historians use or other people use.
I mean, that's the other thing we're finding is that cultural historians come here and musicologists and theater historians to study visual aspects of it or to study descriptions.
So this place is about
research and study and scholarship, whereas the museum is really about exhibition of art itself.
Two entirely different mandates, really, when you think about it in the same place.
Yeah, yeah.
I think it's interesting to talk about how the public enjoys the book or loves the book.
Yeah, I mean, that's the interesting thing to me, is that people really like books, and they come into these exhibits
And they start talking about their memories or their experiences.
And maybe they do that with art.
But I think books are more accessible to people.
Or these objects like road maps or peep shows, they're a little bit more immediate in people's experience.
Maybe they don't have a large painting on their wall of a mythological scene.
But everybody reads books.
Everybody owns books.
Lots of people collect.
That's the idea.
People are really—collecting seems to be this activity, yeah.
I guess that's what the N.T.
Swoet Show tells us.
Well, I love—they had an episode on—they've had their two brothers last week, you know.
And it was for children.
It was about getting children together, collecting.
They have different episodes of the Antiques Roadshow in New Hampshire than I see here.
It must be different public, you know, TVs.
Yeah, I don't think they all had them at the same time.
And the brothers had kept a notebook since I think they were, it was either age 8 or 11.
And at the beginning of it, they wrote, we are antique collectors in this cute, you know, sort of children's handwriting.
And then they were going around writing notes on each piece.
They would try to draw a picture.
They would take measurements.
And it was about how you become a professional dealer.
My father retired when he was 50, and he went to New Hampshire and sold military antiques and barometers.
He's the second barometer maker in New Hampshire, and I have one of his barometers.
He made his own barometers.
They're really great.
I went around with them to auctions for years, and I helped them carry chests and things like that.
Oh, so I think this is a genetic thing.
Yeah.
So when I came here, unlike some of my colleagues in my department who were art historians, that world of the cell room and the auction and collecting and dealing, how you price things, how you put a secret code.
We don't put secret codes for prices on things, but I know what those are.
And so that world was great for me to get into in terms of books.
I had bought books before, but not on the scale we were buying, but here, and bidding at auctions was easy for me, because I had just trailed around with my father for years.
I knew about that.
And it was fun, you know, it was really fun.
Oh, yeah.
Well, at the time I was working with him, I was always wanting to leave, because he was always in the back of the sale room, you know, and I was wanting to get him out, you know, and he was always hanging around, talking to other people, you know.
Of the 800,000 books, how many of those would you say are rare books, special collections?
The rare book collection is over 40,000, but it goes from Renaissance.
You know, there aren't many inclinables that are about art, so I think we have
27 incunables.
Someone always sachets it and says, well, I'm interested in seeing your incunables collection.
We're not the Huntington Library.
So that's not what we did.
And it goes through artist books.
So of that over 40,000, it's probably up to about 45,000.
Temporary artist books?
We have contemporary artist books as well.
So you must be a very interesting place for these.
Yeah, I'm careful to buy things that go with the collection, so we don't have great deep collections in the craft of artists' books, because other people collect those.
We're always very aware of what UCLA is collecting, what's at USC.
We could never compete with the Huntington Library.
Mr. Huntington bought 200 libraries.
That was an amazing time.
And he did about a hundred years or so.
Yeah, yeah.
There were amazing things available when he and Pierpop Morgan and other people like that were buying libraries.
We could never play that game.
He built the entire library.
Yeah.
He collected collections, as you say.
Yeah, yeah.
We did that, but on a much smaller scale.
You know, so we laid this basis for our collections.
Some of the initial collections, not the Besterman collections,
But we bought a collection on 18th century neoclassicism, because 18th century for art history is, this is when art history began.
And it was the collection of Robert de Belder, one of these two brothers, his brother George, also collected botanical books, and there was a very famous sale of his.
But this is Robert de Belder's collection.
He had fragments.
We didn't buy fragments, you know, and objets.
He had regular books as well.
So we had a library that added to our general collections.
And sometimes we bought rare books along with a regular library and laid the basis for the collection.
But pretty much they were discreet.
So there was a rare book collection.
The Muzio Architectural Library was mostly rare books.
on the history of architecture, and Giovanni Muccio was an architect who used those books.
So that was a way that we got a leg up and had a quick base of collections.
But it was nothing like White de Huntington's did.
I'm pretty respectful of that collection.
Well, it's very different, but then you're different things.
Yeah.
You're embarking on a different program.
He was also, he was a private collector, and so like Morgan and some of the other ones, or some of the other collections that based theirs on
We were buying, we knew that we were going to be an open to the public institution that would support the museum, but we're also open to the world.
From the beginning, too.
Yes, we knew that.
We bought at a breathtaking level.
I have never been so busy as when I came here and worked.
But who would not want to do this?
It was an incredible privilege to have the money to build a superb we were buying for condition and completeness.
We wanted good copies that had a kind of historical accuracy and so we valued original condition.
And that was something people didn't understand because
People would say, isn't that book kind of shabby?
And I'd say, no, it's uncut.
It's an original paper wrapper.
No, no.
We actually didn't want those sort of beautiful Morocco bindings from the 19th century with lovely pressed copies, because that taste has changed.
True.
Is your whole catalog in line?
Yeah.
So we can just go home and punch up and see what you have.
Yeah, except for things that have just come in the door, you know, collections that were currently processing.
And that was the other thing is we didn't have to convert a catalog to an electronic format.
We had a small catalog, but it wasn't very substantial.
You had to go through this big retrospective conversion.
What we did was we funded, the Getty Trust funded,
projects for UCLA, for New Public Library, Michigan.
We had good art libraries, and then we could use those cataloging records to do that.
Chris, in less than 20 years, material that encourages... Probably.
Yeah, probably.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
The good stuff isn't around anymore, that's really true.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
The good stuff—and look at this—are you going over fear?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, you've got to go over fear.
I'm heading right out, yeah.
With the internet, does that change the interaction with the US?
I don't use the internet except for pricing.
That is amazing.
And rarity.
Because if you punch something in... Books aren't as rare as you thought.
Yeah, it's really interesting.
Because we mostly get everything on approval.
Because I'm just a hound of condition and I've trained the other curators to be that way about books, to really look for that.
It's hard to buy on the Internet in that way.
But just the ability, just all those online catalogues, the Research Libraries Group, Arlen, OCLC, to be able to see how many copies of books are out there, you know, to get a kind of rough estimate.
When they worked on the ISTC, the Incutable Short Title Catalogues,
Well, I realized how many copies of Incunibulls were around.
How many of Nuremberg?
What is that?
Yeah, it's the Incunibull short title catalog.
And that's in Arlen now.
But there are hundreds of copies of the Nuremberg article.
What were they doing in Nuremberg?
You know, putting out, you know, sort of preliminary.
Can anyone go on to that IACC?
Well, it's part of Arlen now, so you can just subscribe to Arlen and get in.
Yes.
Oh, I know you can, yeah.
Yeah.
I went up there to use their American Book Crisis comic, the CD.
I did a little idea with Kathy Green from the book, too.
She's fascinating.
You know Kathy?
Yes, yes, yes.
She was out here as an advisor for The World From Here.
You know, did you get copies?
Of the devices of one?
Yeah, we have more of those.
And what about The World From Here?
The catalog, the one that was at the Hammer that's closed?
No, no, I'm going to buy one of those in the bookstore, actually.
I don't have that.
I'm happy to give you that.
We have a copy.
I can make a present.
Would you like that?
If only I can reciprocate with a present to you, I'll have to give it to you, but I'll take it on that.
No, we have one thing to give to people who are particularly invested in the world of books,
We had 80 books in that show.
And I wrote some of the captions along with Bruce Whiteman and things like that.
So it's a great catalog about libraries in Los Angeles.
Somewhere there's a box.
I think it's out there because I couldn't take all the boxes.
That's the exhibition we wanted to see when we were out here.
It was a really nice thing and it was very west coast because we had a lot of Asian books in there.
So we were trying to really slant it to the world of the film industry.
to the settlement of Los Angeles, the kind of things, big movie posters that are collected by institutions here.
That's very interesting.
If you find, is there kind of like an expatriate library attitude type of thing that you see?
I mean, is there other Asian libraries here that might be the people of some Asian libraries in Asia, you know?
I don't know.
We're just beginning, I'm just working on that.
My next exhibition I'm going to do after this is on China.
And we've collected these books that are just bridging Europe and China and that view things produced in China, things produced in the West about China, putting them together.
We're just working on that.
Though one of our curators, the bibliographer, the person who is in charge of the general collections, just produced a position paper working with the UCLA, the Richard Rudolph Library, which is a very estimable Chinese-Japanese collection.
And we're working on where we're going to go in terms of that.
But there are very strong Asian collections, and so there were wonderful things in the world from here on.
Chinese books, they have an amazing tradition that's much longer than ours.
The first printed book is, what, the Diamond Sousa or something?
Yes, yes.
400 years, it speaks Gutenberg.
Not with metal, but never the last printed book.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But you can use lots of different techniques to produce lots of different formats.
And we're changing our formats right now for book production, so I wouldn't want to—although I'm very interested in books and printing myself, I would never want to say that's the only format that's important.
One of the chapters in this next book is in all the different surfaces that we've recorded at Five Sines.
Can you tell me something about that?
Can we kind of turn you off for a while and let you talk about that?
I'm kind of interested in that.
That particular subject?
We've had this kind of acrimonious interchanges because the things haven't been well described.
And I had wonderful experience last week as I went to Christie's in New York.
I thought we were going to bid on one of these 18th century auction catalogs by famous French collectors.
There were these people, Mariette, Crozat, Rémy.
And they were principals in auctions.
They sold their own collections.
They bought other people's collections.
And the auction catalogs from that time, it's sort of mid to end of the 18th, maybe 1720s on.
And it really documents very interesting collecting practices.
This was a print catalog, a catalog of Quazat's print collection.
And it supposedly was illustrated
by these little tiny vignettes that this artist, Gabriel de Saint-Aubin, had put in the margins and they showed the paintings and the drawings that were offered for sale in the catalogs.
They were collector's objects since the 18th century.
And this was purportedly a catalog of one of the collectors and auctioneers, Pierre Rémy, illustrated by Saint-Aubin.
As you were reading this, we realized that they had been cut out and put in the Oakland catalogs, so we thought that's very interesting that it's not like the other catalogs, which are just, you know, have marginal vignettes on the page.
And then as I worked on it, I realized this thing has been put together, and the things that were by St.
O'Bend didn't correspond to the entries in the sales catalogs.
In fact, we didn't know what they were, but they were taken from another catalog because they had little catch numbers on them.
Yeah.
And then, when they said that it had been annotated by Pierre Grenier, there was no evidence whatsoever in this catalog that they were buying him.
They were hypothesizing because he wasn't mentioned as one of the buyers.
Well, that doesn't mean anything.
It's interesting.
Yes.
And then...
And from that, we looked at the location.
No, it was somebody new, and he was a very interesting guy.
I don't want to get into it.
Oh, I'm going to get into it.
But he had described it in, you know, the best possible way.
In fact, I think it was kind of put together in the 19th century.
by a collector who wanted to mimic these catalogs that had been done in the 18th century, because the binding was 19th century, and the whole thing had a kind of 19th century look to it.
This is one of the original catalogs.
It's a bad draft copy, but this is what the catalogs really should have looked like.
Even the writings look 19th century.
We had the information in our copies of the sale catalogs that we have already.
We had the buyer and we had the price, so we really had that information.
There were a couple annotations that commented on the taste of a particular work.
They weren't interesting.
And so to go and look at this thing, which is what that is,
And then we went the next day to these, they turned out with the Morgan, and we looked at the real things, and we looked at the quality of the drawings.
Even the quality of the drawings, they were blurred, they were ripped in some cases.
You couldn't really see it.
This beautiful picture of Los Angeles that they showed is wisdom.
In the catalog, it didn't even seem to be like they were at the center bed, so that was awful.
I'm looking at your notes here, you really did.
Oh, it was really fun, because I was working with a dealer,
And then the next year we went to the Morgan and we realized, oh, wait a minute, these things in this catalog hardly look like it, plus the book is problematic.
So we didn't bid on it.
But I went to the auction, you know, how could I not go to the auction after that?
I was growing up time anyway.
And it's sold for $80,000 to the end.
And maybe they knew something.
I wouldn't touch this thing because I didn't know it.
And then the dealer that I worked with, he just went and met me because he had seen it once and then we were meeting with Christine to really go through it.
And it was fun to go through it.
You know, he read the whole thing.
So it was very, you know, very educational.
And he said, he said, this thing has red flags all over it.
And it did.
So.
And so it was so much fun.
Who was the underbid?
You know, the bidding was very spirited.
I just stood at the back of the room and died.
I just thought, have these people really looked at this thing?
And this was 20 to 30.
So it tripled the estimate.
And we were prepared to go a certain way on it.
So you might have brought it if the price was right.
Well, if the thing was okay, though, but as soon as we looked at it, we looked at it.
And what I thought was maybe everybody else would think that.
And we would go back and maybe it would be bought in and we could get it.
But because we didn't know what it was, and maybe there was something that VN knew.
Maybe they knew what this was.
But if I don't know what it is... I'm curious to find out.
Oh my goodness, I'm buying her institution.
You know, it's too scary.
And the dealer agreed was that this was way too scary.
But it was fascinating because it was some kind of object that someone had made to look like a center back catalog.
But it was, oh, it was really fun.
But I like auctions.
I mean, I like these 18th century auctions, because this is sort of the, you know, the heart of when auction sales really get going.
Do you find that catalogs have kind of declined in quality?
What do you think of the internet?
That where they still do printed catalogs is still very good.
You know, it really depends.
There have been some book catalogs.
Hope Mayo did one for how much?
That was an amazing catalogue that you would use as a reference book.
I use the Blackmer collection catalogue all the time.
So some of them are works of high scholarship and become reference books.
Other ones, it's what the buyer beware.
in a drawing scale.
That was very interesting to me.
So you would have drawings kind of served, but you wouldn't have people knew about books.
So, you know, Christian people, they're not dumb.